README.md, before:

# Code for Getting Started With Smart DataLake
## Introduction
This the code used in the Step-By-Step Walk Through Guide to get started with Smart Data Lake

## Run with Docker

### Build docker image

    docker build -t sdl-gs-part-1 .

## Run docker image


    docker run --rm -v ${PWD}/data:/mnt/data -v ${PWD}/config:/mnt/config sdl-gs-part-1:latest -c /mnt/config --feed-sel download.*

## Run with Maven
1. Set the following environment variable: `HADOOP_HOME=/path/to/hadoop` (see https://github.com/smart-data-lake/smart-data-lake).
1. Change directory to project root.
1. Execute all feeds: `mvn clean verify`

Note: To execute a single example:
```
 mvn clean package exec:exec -Dexec.executable="java" -Dexec.args="-classpath %classpath io.smartdatalake.app.LocalSmartDataLakeBuilder --feed-sel <regex-pattern> --config <path-to-projectdir>/src/main/resources" -Dexec.workingdir="target"
```
(requires Maven 3.3.1 or later)

## Run in IntelliJ (on Windows)
1. Ensure, that the directory `src/main/resources` is configured as a resource directory in IntelliJ (File - Project Structure - Modules).
1. Configure and run the following run configuration in IntelliJ IDEA:
   - Main class: `io.smartdatalake.app.LocalSmartDataLakeBuilder`
   - Program arguments: `--feed-sel <regex-feedname-selector> --config $ProjectFileDir$/src/main/resources`
   - Working directory: `/path/to/sdl-examples/target` or just `target`
   - Environment variables:
      - `HADOOP_HOME=/path/to/hadoop` (see https://github.com/smart-data-lake/smart-data-lake)

Commit message:

clarify readme for getting started guide

README.md, after:

# Code for Getting Started With Smart DataLake
## Introduction
This the code used in the Step-By-Step Walk Through Guide to get started with Smart Data Lake Builder (SDL).

There are multiple ways to run the example code.
If you are coming from the getting started guide, 
just follow "Run with Docker".

## Run with Docker

### Build docker image

    docker build -t sdl-gs-part-1 .

## Run docker image


    docker run --rm -v ${PWD}/data:/mnt/data -v ${PWD}/config:/mnt/config sdl-gs-part-1:latest -c /mnt/config --feed-sel download.*

## Run with Maven
1. Set the following environment variable: `HADOOP_HOME=/path/to/hadoop` (see https://github.com/smart-data-lake/smart-data-lake).
1. Change directory to project root.
1. Execute all feeds: `mvn clean verify`

Note: To execute a single example:
```
 mvn clean package exec:exec -Dexec.executable="java" -Dexec.args="-classpath %classpath io.smartdatalake.app.LocalSmartDataLakeBuilder --feed-sel <regex-pattern> --config <path-to-projectdir>/src/main/resources" -Dexec.workingdir="target"
```
(requires Maven 3.3.1 or later)

## Run in IntelliJ (on Windows)
1. Ensure, that the directory `src/main/resources` is configured as a resource directory in IntelliJ (File - Project Structure - Modules).
1. Configure and run the following run configuration in IntelliJ IDEA:
   - Main class: `io.smartdatalake.app.LocalSmartDataLakeBuilder`
   - Program arguments: `--feed-sel <regex-feedname-selector> --config $ProjectFileDir$/src/main/resources`
   - Working directory: `/path/to/sdl-examples/target` or just `target`
   - Environment variables:
      - `HADOOP_HOME=/path/to/hadoop` (see https://github.com/smart-data-lake/smart-data-lake)
