docs/reference/troubleshooting.md, before:

---
id: troubleshooting
title: Troubleshooting
---

:::info
If you have problems with the getting started guide, note that there's a separate [troubleshooting section](../getting-started/troubleshooting/common-problems.md) for that.
:::

## Windows: missing winutils
Error:   
`java.io.IOException: Could not locate executable null\bin\winutils.exe in the Hadoop binaries`

Cause:   
The `winutils.exe` executable can not be found.
- Download hadoop winutils binaries (e.g https://github.com/cdarlint/winutils/archive/refs/heads/master.zip)
- Extract binaries for desired hadoop version into folder (e.g. hadoop-3.2.2\bin)
- Set HADOOP_HOME evironment variable (e.g. HADOOP_HOME=...\hadoop-3.2.2).
  Note that the binary files need to be located at %HADOOP_HOME%\bin!
- Add %HADOOP_HOME%\bin to PATH variable.

## Windows: `/tmp/hive` is not writable 
Error:  
`RuntimeException: Error while running command to get file permissions`  
Solution:   
Change to `%HADOOP_HOME%\bin` and execute `winutils chmod 777 /tmp/hive`.

## Windows: winutils.exe is not working correctly
Error:  
`winutils.exe - System Error The code execution cannot proceed because MSVCR100.dll was not found. Reinstalling the program may fix this problem.`  

Other errors are also possible:
- Similar error message when double clicking on winutils.exe (Popup)
- Errors when providing a path to the configuration instead of a single configuration file
- ExitCodeException exitCode=-1073741515 when executing SDL even though everything ran without errors

Solution:  
Install VC++ Redistributable Package from Microsoft:  
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=5555 (x86)  
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=14632 (x64)

## Java IllegalAccessError (Java 17)
Symptom:
Starting an SDLB pipeline fails with the following exception:
```
java.lang.IllegalAccessError: class org.apache.spark.storage.StorageUtils$ (in unnamed module @0x343570b7) cannot access class sun.nio.ch.DirectBuffer (in module java.base) because module java.base does not export sun.nio.ch to unnamed module @0x343570b7
        at org.apache.spark.storage.StorageUtils$.<init>(StorageUtils.scala:213)
        ...
```

Solution:
Java 17 is more restrictive regarding usage of module exports. Unfortunately Spark uses classes from unexported packages. Packages can be exported manually. To fix above exception add `--add-exports java.base/sun.nio.ch=ALL-UNNAMED` to the java command line, see also [Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/72230174/java-17-solution-for-spark-java-lang-noclassdeffounderror-could-not-initializ).

## Resources not copied
Symptom:   
Tests fail due to missing or outdated resources or the execution starts but can not find the feeds specified. 
IntelliJ might not copy the resource files to the target directory.

Solution:   
Execute the maven goal `resources:resources` (`mvn resources:resources`) manually after you changed any resource file.

## Maven compile error: tools.jar
Error:   
`Could not find artifact jdk.tools:jdk.tools:jar:1.7 at specified path ...`

Context:   
Hadoop/Spark has a dependency on the tools.jar file which is installed as part of the JDK installation.

Possible Reasons:  
1. Your system does not have a JDK installed (only a JRE).
    - Fix: Make sure a JDK is installed and your PATH and JAVA_HOME environment variables are pointing to the JDK installation.
1. You are using a Java 9 JDK or higher. The tools.jar has been removed in JDK 9. See: https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/220
    - Fix: Downgrade your JDK to Java 8.

## How can I test Hadoop / HDFS locally ?
When using `local://` URIs, file permissions on Windows, or certain actions, local Hadoop binaries are required.

1. Download your desired Apache Hadoop binary release from [https://hadoop.apache.org/releases.html](https://hadoop.apache.org/releases.html).
1. Extract the contents of the Hadoop distribution archive to a location of your choice, e.g., `/path/to/hadoop` (Unix) or `C:\path\to\hadoop` (Windows).
1. Set the environment variable `HADOOP_HOME=/path/to/hadoop` (Unix) or `HADOOP_HOME=C:\path\to\hadoop` (Windows).
1. **Windows only**: Download a Hadoop winutils distribution corresponding to your Hadoop version from https://github.com/steveloughran/winutils (for newer Hadoop releases at: https://github.com/cdarlint/winutils) and extract the contents to `%HADOOP_HOME%\bin`.

Commit message:

Schema provider documentation (#776)
* additional java 17 troubleshooting
* add description for schema providers

docs/reference/troubleshooting.md, after:

---
id: troubleshooting
title: Troubleshooting
---

:::info
If you have problems with the getting started guide, note that there's a separate [troubleshooting section](../getting-started/troubleshooting/common-problems.md) for that.
:::

## Windows: missing winutils
Error:   
`java.io.IOException: Could not locate executable null\bin\winutils.exe in the Hadoop binaries`

Cause:   
The `winutils.exe` executable can not be found.
- Download hadoop winutils binaries (e.g https://github.com/cdarlint/winutils/archive/refs/heads/master.zip)
- Extract binaries for desired hadoop version into folder (e.g. hadoop-3.2.2\bin)
- Set HADOOP_HOME evironment variable (e.g. HADOOP_HOME=...\hadoop-3.2.2).
  Note that the binary files need to be located at %HADOOP_HOME%\bin!
- Add %HADOOP_HOME%\bin to PATH variable.

## Windows: `/tmp/hive` is not writable 
Error:  
`RuntimeException: Error while running command to get file permissions`  
Solution:   
Change to `%HADOOP_HOME%\bin` and execute `winutils chmod 777 /tmp/hive`.

## Windows: winutils.exe is not working correctly
Error:  
`winutils.exe - System Error The code execution cannot proceed because MSVCR100.dll was not found. Reinstalling the program may fix this problem.`  

Other errors are also possible:
- Similar error message when double clicking on winutils.exe (Popup)
- Errors when providing a path to the configuration instead of a single configuration file
- ExitCodeException exitCode=-1073741515 when executing SDL even though everything ran without errors

Solution:  
Install VC++ Redistributable Package from Microsoft:  
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=5555 (x86)  
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=14632 (x64)

## Java IllegalAccessError / InaccessibleObjectException (Java 17)
Symptom:
Starting an SDLB pipeline fails with the following exception:
```
java.lang.IllegalAccessError: class org.apache.spark.storage.StorageUtils$ (in unnamed module @0x343570b7) cannot access class sun.nio.ch.DirectBuffer (in module java.base) because module java.base does not export sun.nio.ch to unnamed module @0x343570b7
        at org.apache.spark.storage.StorageUtils$.<init>(StorageUtils.scala:213)
        ...
```

Solution:
Java 17 is more restrictive regarding usage of module exports. Unfortunately Spark uses classes from unexported packages. Packages can be exported manually. To fix the above exception add `--add-exports java.base/sun.nio.ch=ALL-UNNAMED` to the java command line / IntelliJ VM Options, see also [Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/72230174/java-17-solution-for-spark-java-lang-noclassdeffounderror-could-not-initializ).

There might be additional InaccessibleObjectException erros depending on the function of Spark used:
```
java.lang.reflect.InaccessibleObjectException: Unable to make field private final sun.nio.cs.StreamDecoder java.io.InputStreamReader.sd accessible: module java.base does not "opens java.io" to unnamed module @62e7f11d
```

To fix them add additional `--add-opens` parameters to the command line / IntelliJ VM Options according to the list in https://github.com/apache/spark/blob/aa1ff3789e492545b07d84ac095fc4c39f7446c6/pom.xml#L312.

## Java InvalidObjectException: ReflectiveOperationException during deserialization (Java 17)
Symptom:
Starting an SDLB pipeline fails with the following exception:
```
java.io.InvalidObjectException: ReflectiveOperationException during deserialization
	at java.base/java.lang.invoke.SerializedLambda.readResolve(SerializedLambda.java:280)
	...
Caused by: java.lang.reflect.InvocationTargetException
	at java.base/jdk.internal.reflect.NativeMethodAccessorImpl.invoke0(Native Method)
	...
Caused by: java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: too many arguments
	at java.base/java.lang.invoke.LambdaMetafactory.altMetafactory(LambdaMetafactory.java:511)
    ...
```

Solution:
This is a bug in Scala 2.12 together with Java 17. It is solved in Scala 2.12.17+, see also https://github.com/scala/bug/issues/12419.

To fix update Scala 2.12 version in pom.xml to latest release (e.g. `<scala.version>2.12.18</scala.version>`)

## Resources not copied
Symptom:   
Tests fail due to missing or outdated resources or the execution starts but can not find the feeds specified. 
IntelliJ might not copy the resource files to the target directory.

Solution:   
Execute the maven goal `resources:resources` (`mvn resources:resources`) manually after you changed any resource file.

## Maven compile error: tools.jar
Error:   
`Could not find artifact jdk.tools:jdk.tools:jar:1.7 at specified path ...`

Context:   
Hadoop/Spark has a dependency on the tools.jar file which is installed as part of the JDK installation.

Possible Reasons:  
1. Your system does not have a JDK installed (only a JRE).
    - Fix: Make sure a JDK is installed and your PATH and JAVA_HOME environment variables are pointing to the JDK installation.
1. You are using a Java 9 JDK or higher. The tools.jar has been removed in JDK 9. See: https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/220
    - Fix: Downgrade your JDK to Java 8.

## How can I test Hadoop / HDFS locally ?
When using `local://` URIs, file permissions on Windows, or certain actions, local Hadoop binaries are required.

1. Download your desired Apache Hadoop binary release from [https://hadoop.apache.org/releases.html](https://hadoop.apache.org/releases.html).
1. Extract the contents of the Hadoop distribution archive to a location of your choice, e.g., `/path/to/hadoop` (Unix) or `C:\path\to\hadoop` (Windows).
1. Set the environment variable `HADOOP_HOME=/path/to/hadoop` (Unix) or `HADOOP_HOME=C:\path\to\hadoop` (Windows).
1. **Windows only**: Download a Hadoop winutils distribution corresponding to your Hadoop version from https://github.com/steveloughran/winutils (for newer Hadoop releases at: https://github.com/cdarlint/winutils) and extract the contents to `%HADOOP_HOME%\bin`.
